What was the word for problem in Spanish?
Problema.
And the problem?
El problema.
El problema, good.
We can see it ends in an A, so we would expect it to be feminine, but we saw that these words ending MA in Spanish
Many of them entered through Greek and in Greek they're neuter but they look a bit masculine in Greek so they came into Spanish as masculine words even though they end in A.
So we have el problema system
Sistema.
Sistema the system.
El sistema.
Good.
The paradigm.
How do you think that would be in Spanish?
El paradigma.
El paradigma, good.
Scheme also came in from Greek.
But scheme in Spanish means outline or diagram.
How do you think that would be?
El esquema.
Good.
And something else to make it sound a bit more Spanish?
El esquema.
Very good.
We said that we cannot start s
plus another consonant in Spanish.
We have to put an E before, like Spain, Espana, Spaghetti, Espagueti, El Esquema.
So this would be outline or diagram.
Diagram is another one of these words.
How do you think that would be in Spanish?
Diagramma.
Good.
And the diagram?
El Diagramma.
Good.
So
Mostly words ending O are masculine and words ending a are feminine, but we might find some exceptions.
Planeta, for example.
What do you think that means?
Planeta
Planet.
Planeta is a masculine word.
So the planet.
El planeta.
A planet.
Un planeta.
Un planeta, very good.
How would you say the planets?
Los planetas.
Very good.
Good.
So this is a masculine word that looks feminine.
How was the word for car?
We saw various words.
Auto?
Auto.
Let's work with that one.
How do you say the car?
El auto.
The cars
Los autos.
Los autos, good.
If you want to say this car, you say este auto.
Este auto.
Good.
We saw esta noche this night.
What do you think is the difference between este and esta then?
If we have este auto and esta noche, what do you think is the difference?
Este is the masculine.
Good.
And esta the feminine.
So we see that noce is a feminine word.
How would you say the night?
La noche.
The nights.
Las noches.
Good.
But this night or tonight
Esta noche.
Good.
If you take this T out of este and esta, the words for this, you get the word for that.
So este auto is this car and that car would be auto.
How would you say I want that car?
Quiero ese auto.
Good.
I don't want that car because it's very big.
Big is a grand.
So how would that be in Spanish?
Very good
No quiero ese auto because it's muy grande.
How was this night?
And how would be that night?
Esa noche.
We just get rid of the T and then we have the word for that.
What if you wanted to say those nights?
Esas noches.
Essas noches.
Good.
There are also a few words that end in o which are feminine.
For example, mano mano means hand ends in oh but it's a feminine word.
So how would you say the hand?
La mano La mano good the hands
Las manos.
This hand esta mano.
Good.
That hand
Essa mano.
Good.
These hands.
Estas manos.
Good.
We have this word in English like in manuscript.
Manual as well, manual, manuscript, that that man bit there means hand.
Maintain, which in Spanish is a maner.
We have main or man means hand.
Manage, manage means to handle.
Actually, it has a special use for handling horses.
historically, which is interesting because to manage manejar is used in some Latin American countries to mean to drive.
Other than to manage or to handle, it also means
to drive manekhar, which is interesting because this verb manage historically had a special use to handle horses and we see how that's kind of translated over the years to driving.
How would you say, can you give me a hand?
So this is a literal translation of something idiomatic in English, but it works in Spanish as well.
In Spanish you say this
Can you give me a hand and let's talk informally?
Me pued start un mano but it's una mano.
Good
Puedes dar me or me puedes dar una mano.
How would you say, could you give me a hand?
Could you give me a hand?
So could is would can.
Me podrías dar una mano.
You should give me a hand.
Should is a wood O.
Still informal.
You should.
Me deberías dar una mano.
Here we're not asking though.
It sounded like a question.
You should give me a house.
Oh yes.
Give it to me again, not like a question, like an like a statement.
You should give me a hand.
Good.
And what if you were speaking to more than one person?
Deberian dar me una mano.
Good.
Deberian darme una mano.
You guys should give us a hand.
Good.
So we said that manejar means to handle or to manage.
Manejar.
And also to drive in some Latin American countries.
How would you say I am managing the problem or I manage the problem?
Manejo el problema.
Good.
So how would you say I'm managing the problem and you mean right now?
So I remind you that for managing
For R verbs to get this ing we take away r and we put ando and for r ear verbs for this ing we take away the er or the ear and we put iendo
First part is I am managing.
I am managing.
Stoy manejando.
Good.
I'm managing the problem
So mano, we said ends in O and it's feminine.
It's actually kind of the only true word that ends in O.
and is feminine so for example we have la photo the photo but photo is short for photographia
So it's actually la photografia becomes la foto.
The same with la moto.
The motorbike is actually la motocycleta.
No?
That people say moto and photo and it stays with la
To take in Spanish is tomar, tomar.
Tomar.
Good.
So how would you say I'm taking a photo?
And you mean right now
Stoy tomando una photo.
Good.
You might hear sakar as well for photo.
Sakar or tomar.
Stoy tomando una photo, estoy sacando una photo.
I would take a photo.
Tomaria una photo.
I would like so it would please me to take a photo.
So this to please or like
Gustar.
So it would please me, I would like, it would please me to take a photo
Pero no tengo mi camera.
Good.
Well together.
I would like to take a photo.
It would please me to take a photo, but I don't have my camera.
me gustaría tomar un foto fotografía una foto pero no tengo mi
Cámara.
Very good.
Me gustaría tomar una foto, pero no tengo mi cámara.